docs: add a Kubernetes guide (#71)
graphops/docs: docs/launchpad/guides/kubernetes-guide.md

---
---
# Kubernetes Guide

## Introduction

[Kubernetes](https://kubernetes.org/) is the container orchestration system emerging as the victor of the container wars.
Some of its characteristics that stand out are:

- being opensource
- having an API designed to be easily extended
- following a design pattern based on controllers and reconciliation loops

The major components that make up k8s are:

- **etcd:** a key-value store 
- **kube-apiserver:** exposes the Kubernetes API 
- **kube-controller-manager:** single binary that combines a variety of controllers
- **kube-scheduler:** assigns containers to nodes
- **kubelet:** responsible for setting up containers
- **kube-proxy:** manages iptables rules in order to implement the Kubernetes service abstraction

Being a multi-node clustered system, Kubernetes topology distinguishes between two different roles:
- **control-plane** nodes: these are the nodes that run *apiserver*, *kube-controller-manager*, and in some setups also *etcd* nodes (*etcd* could, potentially, run externally in its own independent nodes)
- **worker** nodes: these need to run mostly *kubelet*, as their purpose is focused on running the workload containers

> Setting up, and bootstrapping a cluster involves installing and configuring all the required components, certificates management, and container manifests that make up the system. There are quite a few choices and tools available to accomplish just that (and doing everything manually is an insane but educative way amongst those: [Kubernetes - The Hard Way](https://github.com/kelseyhightower/kubernetes-the-hard-way)).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Setting up, and bootstrapping a cluster involves installing and configuring all the required components, certificates management, and container manifests that make up the system. There are numerous options and tools to achieve this goal, but performing manual bootstrapping is a highly educational experience: [Kubernetes - The Hard Way](https://github.com/kelseyhightower/kubernetes-the-hard-way)).
```

> This guide is focused on [Kubeadm](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/setup-tools/kubeadm/) - a tool used to bootstrap and manage the lifecycle of a Kubernetes cluster (upgrade, add/remove nodes, ...). It automates the process of setting up a cluster and provides a consistent way of doing it, while preserving almost as much control over the setup as a purely manual one.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This guide utilizes [Kubeadm](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/setup-tools/kubeadm/) - a tool used to bootstrap and manage the lifecycle of a Kubernetes cluster (upgrade versions, add/remove nodes). It automates the process of setting up a cluster and provides a consistent way of doing it while preserving almost as much control over the setup as a purely manual one.
```

controlPlaneEndpoint: <endpoint_ip_or_dns>
```
where you must replace `<endpoint_ip_or_dns>` by the control-plane's endpoint and, optionally, choose a different podSubnet and/or serviceSubnet. Documentation on all the many configuration options available can be found [here](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/config-api/kubeadm-config.v1beta3/).

next, you can use *kubeadm* to bootstrap the cluster with:
```yaml
kubeadm init --upload-certs --config cluster-config.yaml
```

after which, if all goes well, one should see output similar to this:

```bash
[root@iris /]# kubeadm init
I0515 19:48:51.424146 1642628 version.go:256] remote version is much newer: v1.27.1; falling back to: stable-1.25
[init] Using Kubernetes version: v1.25.9
[preflight] Running pre-flight checks
[preflight] Pulling images required for setting up a Kubernetes cluster
[preflight] This might take a minute or two, depending on the speed of your internet connection
[preflight] You can also perform this action in beforehand using 'kubeadm config images pull'
[certs] Using certificateDir folder "/etc/kubernetes/pki"
[certs] Generating "ca" certificate and key
[certs] Generating "apiserver" certificate and key

> [certs] apiserver serving cert is signed for DNS names [iris kubernetes kubernetes.default kubernetes.default.svc kubernetes.default.svc.cluster.local] and IPs [10.96.0.1 135.181.181.107]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[certs] apiserver serving cert is signed for DNS names [iris kubernetes kubernetes.default kubernetes.default.svc kubernetes.default.svc.cluster.local] and IPs [10.96.0.1 134.177.177.107]
```

[certs] Generating "apiserver-kubelet-client" certificate and key
[certs] Generating "front-proxy-ca" certificate and key
[certs] Generating "front-proxy-client" certificate and key
[certs] Generating "etcd/ca" certificate and key
[certs] Generating "etcd/server" certificate and key

> [certs] etcd/server serving cert is signed for DNS names [iris localhost] and IPs [135.181.181.107 127.0.0.1 ::1]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[certs] etcd/server serving cert is signed for DNS names [iris localhost] and IPs [134.177.177.107 127.0.0.1 ::1]
```

[certs] Generating "etcd/peer" certificate and key

> [certs] etcd/peer serving cert is signed for DNS names [iris localhost] and IPs [135.181.181.107 127.0.0.1 ::1]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[certs] etcd/peer serving cert is signed for DNS names [iris localhost] and IPs [134.177.177.107 127.0.0.1 ::1]
```

Then you can join any number of worker nodes by running the following on each as root:

kubeadm join 192.168.0.200:6443 --token 9vr73a.a8uxyaju799qwdjv --discovery-token-ca-cert-hash sha256:7c2e69131a36ae2a042a339b33381c6d0d43887e2de83720eff5359e26aec866
```
(*Note*: Save these `kubeadm join` commands presented in this output, as they contain secrets that will be required to add more nodes in future steps.)

this being a control-plane node, *kubeadm* will have created a *kubeconfig* file in /etc/kubernetes/admin.conf. A *kubeconfig* file is an YAML file that contains the required metadata and credentials to talk to the cluster, that being: certificates/tokens and endpoint specification. *Kubectl* will use whatever *kubeconfig* file is pointed at by the KUBECONFIG environment variable, or, by default, the file in `~/.kube/config`. So, as suggested in the output, we should do:
```bash
export KUBECONFIG=/etc/kubernetes/admin.conf
```

now *kubectl* should be setup to interact your the cluster. Try it by doing the following command:

```bash

> [root@iris /]# kubectl get nodes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[root@demo /]# kubectl get nodes
```

```bash
CILIUM_CLI_VERSION=$(curl -s https://raw.githubusercontent.com/cilium/cilium-cli/master/stable.txt)
CLI_ARCH=amd64
cd /usr/local/bin
curl -L --fail --remote-name-all https://github.com/cilium/cilium-cli/releases/download/${CILIUM_CLI_VERSION}/cilium-linux-${CLI_ARCH}.tar.gz{,.sha256sum}
sha256sum --check cilium-linux-${CLI_ARCH}.tar.gz.sha256sum
sudo tar xzvfC cilium-linux-${CLI_ARCH}.tar.gz /usr/local/bin
rm cilium-linux-${CLI_ARCH}.tar.gz{,.sha256sum}
```

and then proceed to install cilium with default options by running:
```bash
/usr/local/bin/cilium install
```

## Adding more control-plane nodes

If you have gone with the default topology setup, *kubeadm* should be instantiating *etcd* instances co-located with your control-plane nodes. Given that and the fact that *etcd* is a majority quorum based system, it's specially important that for a high-availability setup you'll keep an ***odd*** (i.e: one, thee, five, ...) number of control-plane nodes. As such, the minimum number of control-plane nodes that can offer high-availability would be three.

To add more control-plane nodes you need to first get the hosts ready for such by:

> - preparing that node OS as required

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- preparing the node OS as required
```
